The phyloreferencing (hereafter as phyloref) project team had their second face-to-face meeting on Oct 11 & 12, 2017. The first took place in Apr, 2017. See meeting blog/report [here]({% post_url /blog/2017-04-26-first-face-to-face-project-meeting.md %}). During this two-day meeting, we covered a range of topics, with an emphasis on concept taxonomy, phyloref specifications and future plans.

The meeting kicked off with Gaurav laying out an agenda and reviewing the timeline of the project. On top of the list was phyloref specifications, which Gaurav has been working on quite extensively, but faces several challenges, theoretical or practical. Curation workflow was also on the list, but its deficiencies were discussed during the second day. Hilmar suggested the curation be driven by compelling user stories. We brainstormed around that idea including primates, amphibians (e.g., Rana), butterflies and plants. This idea precipitated to a resolution, i.e., reaching out to NSF GoLife projects, and this task was assigned to Guanyang. He will be working along with Nico to contact GoLife project PIs to explain what we are doing and how they could get involved. Nico also mentioned specifically that GoLife projects are different from the previous “Tree of Life” projects as the former put a special emphasis on generating data layers and integrating data with phylogenies. These are line with one of the objectives of the phyloref project, i.e., enabling and facilitating large-scale data integration.

In terms of timeline, we discussed specifically two events. First, the Evolution 2018 meeting is still on the horizon and we would need to be ready to submit an abstract by Jan 2018 to a symposium, either the one proposed by Guanyang or another, if the former fails to be accepted by the meeting [1]. In that abstract, we need to specify a mvp (minimal viable product) or a goal that we could deliver or accomplish and present at the actual meeting in Aug 2018. The second event that actually comes a lot more sooner is our first advisory board meeting, scheduled to happen in Feb. This is going to be an online meeting. It could also be a good time for Hilmar to come down to Gainesville for another in-person project meeting.

We would like to have a prototype by Aug 2018, which should have the following features. 

1. Reciprocal queries using a phylogeny or a phyloref as an input. When a phylogeny is provided as an input, a query should generate a list of phylorefs pertaining to that phylogeny. On the other hand, if a phyloref is used as an input, the query should resolve to a node/clade on a phylogeny. 
2. Clear benefits to users, as motivated by the user stories we plan to create. 
3. Easy to handle (user-friendly). The second and third points are quite self-explanatory. In summary, the prototype needs to be useful, appealing and accessible to biologists.
